so welcome back let's go ahead and take
a look at chapter 2 and atomic bonding
the kinds of questions that we'd like to
ask today is as we bring
two atoms or ions together as they
approach each other
and form a bond i'd like to
quantify the amount of energy that holds
the atoms together that's the bond
energy
we like to quantify the equilibrium
distance between the atoms
how close will they sit next to one
another they get too close they're going
to repel
as they overlap so there's some
equilibrium distance
that we want to talk about this will be
obviously related to the radius of the
atoms
and we like to talk about what kind of
properties even at this level of bonding
are affected
all right so let's go ahead and look at
the energy
between two ions that at first very far
apart okay these will have
some attractive energy this is a fairly
long range force
and so we may have some attractive
energy here between the particles
and as they start to approach each other
this attractive energy will continue to
become more and more negative
it's a larger and larger attractive
energy
okay so you think about the strength of
the attraction it's the absolute value
that you're thinking of in terms of
energy the energy is going down
negative are favorable energies
if these particles get very close
i should say that this separation here
between the particles
is r that's what we've got plotted here
on our
x part of the axis to get very close
that attractive energy starts to go
become very negative
but they get too close then they start
overlapping
and we get a repulsive energy so there
really are two terms here an attractive
energy
that's this one and a repulsive energy
which is a short range force
but it increases very fast with this
power n
and n might be for example 9
and you're given your homework problem
and what we can do is we can add these
two terms and when we add these two
terms we get the red curve that's here
this is our net energy
net energy all right and so
at some point when the repulsive energy
starts to kick in strongly
it will dominate at short distances
that's why this starts to go back up
become positive our attractive is still
becoming negative
but the repulsive winds and so the
equilibrium distance
is this minimum in the net energy curve
okay so this distance out to the minimum
is r zero
that's the equilibrium uh separation
and the value here of this well how deep
it is
is the bond energy e0 and so that's
where we get
the equilibrium spacing and the bond
energy
now the bond energy in your text they
will
use joules and also evs and so i think
the problems i've given you we're
working in evs
and so a typical bond energy
say might be three or four or five
electron volts
depending on the material
all right so that is our energy curve
now if we wanted to uh come up with say
an equation
for the uh equilibrium spacing or the
bond energy
all we have to notice here is that at
our minimum we've got a slope down here
zero so if we take the derivative
of the net energy curve with respect to
the radius
and we evaluate that at r0
this derivative will be equal to zero
okay so i take the derivative i set it
equal to zero
and then i solve for r that r that i'm
solving for
is r zero the equilibrium spacing
once i have r zero then i just take that
and put that into
the net energy equation and that'll then
give me the bond energy easier
so we can do that mathematically
all right for homework you will
be looking at the attractive and
repulsive energies between two ions
this is this example we have potassium
and chloride i don't remember
i thought what your homework was but
they will give you
the attractive equation the repulsive
equation
and remember again what we need is just
the net so we're just simply going to
plot
simply going to add these two we're
going to do this in a plot
so i'll show you what it looks like in
excel
um and then i'll post maybe a video
helping you actually work through excel
if you're having trouble
but in excel we can go ahead and make a
column for the attractive
for the repulsive and then add the two
and then plot all of those versus
the radius r and we'll generate this
curve
that we just saw and then from there we
can read off the bond energy
and the equilibrium's atom spacing
okay so again this is going to remind
you of the equation
this is the data that was given and i
have all of that written over here for
my constants
in this case i actually went through and
did the derivative
of the equation and found the equations
for e zero and
r zero so that's what these were for you
don't have to do that
these are calculated
and so what i need to do is just simply
plot this equation so what i'm going to
do is make a column of
r values and the units are in nanometers
so i'll go ahead and we do that and then
i make a column
for the attractive energy piece
and a column for the repulsive energy
piece
and then i'll go ahead and add those two
for the net energy
and then all i need to do is select
these columns and
tell excel to go ahead and scatter plot
it
and i'll get something like this here on
the right
i know when you first go ahead and do
this in excel what you'll probably find
is that
you don't see actually anything except
for maybe a flat line
and then it looks like your curve kind
of does that
so if you double check on the limits of
the axes here you'll probably find that
they're very very
high so that you can't see as well which
is only
on the order of in this case say almost
0.5 i mean
almost negative 5 evs that's because at
very close spacings
the repulsive part is very very large so
you notice the size of these numbers
so what you can do is either skip some
of those when you go ahead and do your
plotting
or easier is just go ahead and double
click on your y-axis
and change the scale to something much
more reasonable and you'll get your
curve
now one of the reasons why we're
interested in this bond energy
is that it's related to some properties
of a material and
we'll talk about some of those as we go
on right now i just want to give you one
example which is the melting point
so the bond energy is the energy at
which the atoms are held in position
if you like when we're in a solid
and then we come a liquid we have to
have enough energy to overcome those
that bond energy turn it into a liquid
that's the melting point
and so we we get them this energy by
adding
heat or temperature to our sample
and so once the thermal energy right
gets added into the sample and starts to
become
a significant fraction of this bond
energy then those bonds can be
broken and you end up with with a liquid
and so bottom line here is that as the
bond energy of a material increases
okay that means that the atoms are held
tighter
together they're bound together
the melting point of the material will
also
increase and when we're talking about
high bond energies we're talking about
deep wells okay we're taking the
absolute value here
of i'll just put here this kind of
reminder we're taking the absolute value
here of this well
so a sample that maybe looks like this
this is a and this is sample b right
the melting point of sample b
would be greater than the melting point
of sample a
because the bond energy of sample b
is greater than the bond energy of
sample
a has a much deeper well